[THEME MUSIC]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: From the
time most of us can remember,
we've brought back dreams
from the other side,
making dreams a source
of great curiosity.
David Jay Brown is
with us today to have
a conversation about
lucid dreaming, substances
that can enhance
that experience,
and what dream research
is showing us now--
a lot of interesting things.
I've read a lot of dream books.
I've interviewed people
on dreams before.
However, you went the
extra mile on the research,
because it brought up some
nuggets that I have not seen.
So I'll be happy for you to
share them with our viewing
audience as we go on here.
But first of all, one
thing that struck me
is that you have worked in
relationship with Rupert
Sheldrake, who I just love.
We've both been
there to his home
in Hampton Heath in
England, and he's
such a brilliant mind while
at the same time being
out of the box.
And he's also almost completely
rejected by British society,
just like Prince Charles, and
they relate to each other.
He shares his research with the
prince, which is interesting.
And yet, these two
brilliant minds--
on the subject of
environment, economy, and so
forth-- are totally shunned.
What is it you're
doing, what are you
bringing to the picture
in that little matrix?
>> DAVID JAY BROWN: Oh, well,
I worked with Rupert for three
years.
It was really an honor.
I don't think I have
to tell you as you
know what an amazing man he is.
I was involved in the
research for two of his books.
I did all the
California-based research
for his book "Dogs
That Know When
Their Owners are Coming Home,"
and "The Sense of Being Stared
At."
So I was involved in looking
at some of the animals' ability
to sense things that
conventional science has
great difficulty explaining--
psychic powers in both
animals, as well as in people.
And he was a mentor of mine.
I stayed with him at
his apartment in London
for a while, and it was one
of the most powerful learning
experiences of my life.
And, yeah--
>> REGINA: Yeah, he's--
how did you find
him as a being to be
around that amount of time?
Because he's so lost
in thought, and he
has a very grounded wife
who really keeps him
fed and so forth.
How did you find the
way his mind works--
just moment in, moment out?
>> BROWN: Oh, just
absolutely brilliant.
I mean, absolutely brilliant.
He has an amazing--
first of all, an encyclopedic
mind and the ability
to synthesize from
many different areas
and just bring together elements
from so many different--
spirituality and
science together,
he's able to integrate in a
really remarkable and unique
way.
And his whole theory of
morphogenetic field and morphic
fields is absolutely brilliant
and explains so many things
that conventional science
has difficulty explaining.
>> REGINA: And doesn't
that start crossing over
into your area, as well?
>> BROWN: Into my area--
>> REGINA: Into dreams?
>> BROWN: Into the
area of dreams?
I spoke to Rupert quite a
bit, actually, about dreams.
And he believes that
there are morphic fields--
>> REGINA: I do, too.
>> BROWN: --for the dreams, and
that there are some dreams that
are more personal, some
are more universal,
and some are more
mystically-oriented.
And people have
experiences of these
that reverberate, or
resonates, between one another.
And the people who
have had them tend
to have more experiences
with other people who
have had those experiences.
As They connect
in different ways.
>> REGINA: So the morphic
field is in operation whether
you're awake or asleep.
You're just in another
phased-off dimension anyway.
>> BROWN: Yeah, it
sure seems that way.
>> REGINA: Yeah,
I would think so.
I think I said
Hampstead Heath, right?
>> BROWN: Yeah, that
was where it was, right.
>> REGINA: It just
occurred to me.
So thank you for
that, and let's get
into the notion of--
you've written a book,
and it has both the
subject of dreaming
and the use of various
substances and herbs,
hallucinogens in
the dream state--
or to enhance a dream state.
How did that end up
coming together for you?
>> BROWN: Yeah, I've been
interested in the interface
between shamanic healing,
psychedelic plants,
and lucid dreaming since I've
been 16 when I had my first
psychedelic experience.
And within one or two
days after that, just
spontaneously,
had a lucid dream.
That's how I first got
interested in the phenomena.
Over the years, I've
learned that many people
who have had ayahuasca
experiences down in the Amazon,
or who have experienced
iboga, the African root,
within one or two
days after that,
will spontaneously
have a lucid dream.
Another interesting similarity
is that the brain states--
the brain activity--
is actually very similar in a
lucid dream state, in a dream
state, and in a psychedelic
state with, say, psilocybin
or with ayahuasca.
There's similar types
of brain activity.
It's interesting that people
refer to both phenomenas
as waking up.
When people do a psychedelic
inside of a lucid dream--
just a dream psychedelic-- it
will have a real experience.
People actually have a
visionary or mystical experience
within the dream as a
result of doing that.
So there's really a number
of different connections.
It's used both in shamanism.
Shamanism utilizes
both certain plants--
medicine plants like ayahuasca,
as well as lucid dreaming.
And most interestingly, in fact,
cultural anthropologists often
have a hard time
distinguishing between reports
from indigenous people--
whether they actually
were talking about a
lucid dream experience
or a visionary
experience with a plant.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> BROWN: So it's sometimes
very hard to even tell
the difference.
So there's a lot of connections,
and I saw that nobody had ever
written about this before.
So that was my inspiration for
putting together this book.
>> REGINA: It's well
done, well-written.
>> BROWN: Thank
you so very much.
>> REGINA: And let's get into
some more technical aspects
of dreams that have been
broken down via EEG,
work in laboratories, and such.
>> BROWN: Yeah,
well, let me explain.
I think probably the
most exciting thing
to really explain is how lucid
dreaming became a science.
Sleep researchers had,
for the longest time,
basically pooh-poohed the
whole idea of lucid dreaming.
It was basically occultists
and spiritual people that
were talking about it, and
it wasn't really considered
something that was a
real scientific reality.
It was through experiments using
EEG monitors and the ability
to communicate from
within the dream state
that people were able to
show that lucid dreaming was
an actual reality.
So what they would do is they
would hook people up in sleep
labs while they were sleeping to
EEG monitors so that they could
demonstrate that the people
were actually in a sleep state--
whether their
alpha, beta, theta,
delta states had gone down--
and that they were
genuinely dreaming.
And they would
then show that they
were in what was called REM
sleep-- the rapid eye movement
stage of sleep where people
are usually most actively
dreaming-- although they can
dream in other phases of sleep,
as well.
But what was remarkable
about this research that--
Keith Hearne in England
did the first one,
and the second one was done
by Stephen LaBerge, who
is a physiologist at
Stanford University.
And what they
showed, remarkably,
was that when people
were in the dream state,
they were able to communicate
by moving their eyes.
Your eyes are the
one part of your body
that corresponds from your dream
eyes to your physical body.
So if you move your
eyes in the dream state,
they will correspond.
So here we have the record
from the EEG monitor
showing the person's
in sleep state,
and then there are these
sweeping movements of the eyes
right, left, right, left--
going back and forth.
And this was a predetermined,
prearranged code,
almost like a Morse code.
So this was really
definitive evidence--
>> REGINA: But this was
conscious signaling from
the lucid dream state
world to the lab techs?
>> BROWN: Yes.
>> REGINA: Yes, that's what
I found really fascinating.
>> BROWN: Yes, yes.
And that was what demonstrated
that lucid dreaming was
a reality, because they
showed that when people were
in a dream state, they
were able to follow through
with predetermined
instructions and carry them
out the procedure, and then
consciously communicate
from that state.
Because like I said, they
had just criticized this
and said they were
skeptical and didn't
believe it was really true.
And it's now been
replicated many times
and many people have done it.
And they're doing more and more
different types of research
into locating the area of the
brain that's most responsible.
Some of the most interesting
neuroscience research
that's going on
with lucid dreaming
is they've actually discovered
what's going on in the brain.
And it's basically
the activation
of what's called the
prefrontal cortex--
this area of the
brain right here--
is normally inactivated
when people are asleep.
But in a lucid
dream, it becomes--
>> REGINA: Engaged.
>> BROWN: It becomes engaged.
And they've been able to,
with now transcranial brain
stimulation, actually
activate that in people.
So on-demand, we can now
have people have lucid dreams
while they're sleeping
just by activating there.
>> REGINA: That's going to
be interesting when little,
pocket-sized devices are out
and people can just dial up
a little activation in the
prefrontal cortex and go
into lucid dreaming with
assistance of technology.
>> BROWN: Yes, it's right
around the corner, really.
We have the
technology right now,
so it's just a matter of a
start up producing these devices
and miniaturizing them
and lowering the price.
>> REGINA: Yeah, it's like
Patrick Flanagan did with his
little NEO device that
essentially creates
coordination between the
right and left hemispheres
of the brain.
Amazing little device, but
pocket-sized, inexpensive.
You just put the
little electrodes on
and your brain's
awake and functioning.
And I don't see
why that can't be
done across all states
of consciousness.
>> BROWN: You'll be able to dial
and tune any reality you want,
it looks like.
>> REGINA: That's good, as
long as we're the programmers.
>> BROWN: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: So when
you're looking at REM,
everybody knows that's basically
rapid eye movements when
we're dreaming.
We're dreaming fast and hard.
Our eyes are moving.
But there are some
states of consciousness
that seem to emerge more
prevalent than others.
And one of them is--
you say during REM,
a lot of times more
fearful situations
start filtering in
through REM time.
Does anyone understand
why, during that period?
>> BROWN: I don't think
anybody fully understands.
There's different
theories as to why.
People tend to have more
anxiety-related dreams
than they do positive
dreams in general.
Studies have shown that.
And in my own research
and talking to people,
I find most people report
dreams where they're frustrated.
They're anxious.
They're late for something.
Someone's chasing them.
It's very, very common for
these things to happen,
and especially during the rapid
eye movement phase of sleep
that you're describing.
One of the primary theories
that dream researchers have
is that this serves an
evolutionary function.
That in our past,
that having dreams--
they would serve as a
model for the future.
Things that we might do.
And having some kind
of anticipation ability
to figure out what your
reaction would be if a tiger
is going to jump on
you or something.
If you dream about
it beforehand,
this may have had some type of
advantage for our ancestors.
And if so, that would
have propelled it forward.
That's one of the leading
theories as to why
there's more anxiety in dreams.
It could also be that we just
have a very anxious world.
>> REGINA: Well, that
goes without saying, yes.
I used to have one of those
reoccurring dreams, which
was as a news anchor--
which is a stressful job, right?
I'd show up and I'd get a call.
The show was on in five minutes.
I didn't have a chance
to brush my hair or teeth
or put clothing on.
And the audio man
would come to mic me,
but there was only skin.
And it was the worst.
It's been a while
since those, but--
>> BROWN: But it's probably
pretty common for people
to have those kind of
dreams, in your situation.
It's probably very, very common.
I mean, one of the most common--
people showing up
situations, not
wearing clothes or something--
>> REGINA: When it's a public
situation and the camera's just
about to go on.
>> BROWN: That's why it's so
wonderful to have lucid dreams
where you can take control of
the dream and actually have
a little more fun with it.
>> REGINA: Yeah, well, it ended
up kind of fun in the end.
But anyway, then
there's something
I've not heard of before called
NREM, which tends to bring
on a different kind of state.
Talk about what that means
and what kind of state
it brings on.
>> BROWN: Yes, you can
divide sleep, basically,
into the REM state-- rapid
eye movement-- or the non-REM.
There's three phases
of non-REM, but you
can put them all together
in REM versus non-REM,
because REM state is a
very active stage of sleep,
whereas non-REM
sleep is basically
pretty passive by comparison.
And it was thought
that people only
dream in REM sleep for a while.
And more recently, they've
discovered that even
in non-REM states, that
people dream as well.
Not only do they dream as well,
but they also can lucid dream.
And that's--
>> REGINA: Yeah, and you
can have total recall.
>> BROWN: And you can
have total recall.
And the dreams tend
to be different.
They tend to be less
action-oriented.
The person tends to be
more of an observer,
watching something.
They're usually not
as anxiety-driven,
as you mentioned.
So there's definitely a
difference between these two.
But I think people tend to
remember their REM dreams more.
Those are the ones that
usually we have in the morning,
and they're ones people
remember the most.
>> REGINA: Well, most
of mine are the other.
>> BROWN: You mostly
remember mostly the non-REMS,
the non-REM dreams.
Really?
>> REGINA: Yeah.
I'm oftentimes an
observer and just
moving with people or so forth.
Yeah, the vast majority.
>> BROWN: That's fascinating,
because yeah, that's unusual.
That's fascinating.
You're unusual.
>> REGINA: So a lot of this
book is based on your own
experiences.
So let's talk about
your own dream time.
Do you have a lot of the
classic anxiety going on,
or are they more adventurous?
You share a lot of your
dreams in the book.
>> BROWN: Yeah, since
I've been a child,
I remember my dreams very well.
I have a lot of dreams that--
good dream recall.
I think my dreams tend to
be more of the REM dreams
that I recall in the morning.
I've never actually measured
the brain wave cycle,
so I don't know for sure.
But from what I
understand, they seem
to be more of the REM type.
I have lucid dreams maybe
about once a month or so.
And--
>> REGINA: Do you instruct
yourself to have them,
or do they happen randomly?
>> BROWN: I practice a
number of techniques to try.
You have to keep
practicing them.
Lucid dreaming is
like riding a bicycle.
It's not like riding a bicycle
where you just keep doing it.
It's more like doing
something fitness.
If you stop doing it,
you won't do it as well.
It's not like you can just pick
it up and start doing it again.
If you stop practicing the
techniques, what you'll find
is that you'll
actually start having
less and less lucid dreams.
So I practice the
techniques pretty regularly.
I have a lucid dream
about once a month.
My dreams tend to be
pretty anxiety-driven a lot
of the time, actually.
>> REGINA: Which you
say is-- that's normal.
>> BROWN: Which is
pretty normal, yeah.
>> REGINA: We generally
do, as human beings.
>> BROWN: Yeah.
>> REGINA: What about--
in lab settings I've been
in-- and I've been in a few
different situations with
technology and EEGs and such--
it shows really interesting
patterns in the brain,
like waking delta,
which is fascinating.
Those people are usually the
great geniuses on the planet,
where information-- while they
are alert and awake during
the day--
deep, connected
information and revelations
are flowing through them.
And I remember being this one
lab setting with this guy who
was a gajillionaire
because he'd figured out
an algorithm for this
particular process
I can't mention that
people love doing.
And everything came through him
just in this quiet little place
while he's awake, not
while he was sleeping.
>> BROWN: Yeah,
that's fascinating.
>> REGINA: Waking delta.
>> BROWN: I mean, I know people
who can meditate into delta,
so they can go into those
very deep states that normally
people only experience
when they're sleeping.
>> REGINA: Exactly, and that's
fascinating because a lot
of revelations seem to be coming
through to humanity through
that.
They're able to determine
things and in the EEGs
they call angel patterns.
So they can tell who's
intuitive and open to seeing
from other realms and that
kind of thing, which--
>> BROWN: Fascinating.
>> REGINA: That's James Hardt.
In fact, if anyone wants
to see that interview I
did with Dr. James Hardt, it's
a really fascinating interview
on that degree.
It's grueling to go
through, by the way,
grueling but fascinating.
And so one of the
things that you
talked about a little bit ago is
the general anxiety in society.
But let's talk about
industrialization at large
and what that has done to not
just dream time, but sleep
patterns and the
brain in general.
>> BROWN: Yes, well, thanks
to the Industrial Revolution,
we have artificial lighting.
And artificial lighting
has changed sleep patterns.
There's interesting
evidence that I
wasn't familiar with until I
did the research for this book
that prior to the
industrial age,
people had two periods of sleep.
They would call it first
period, or first sleep,
and a second sleep.
Where they would sleep
for about six hours
or so, wake up around midnight,
be awake for about two hours,
and then go back to sleep for
like another four hours or so.
And this was a very,
very common sleep pattern
that apparently we've lost.
There's been
scientific studies that
show when people are put into
an environment where they're not
exposed to any other
artificial light besides a very
controlled setting for just a
certain number of hours a day,
that they will fall into
a similar type of pattern
where they sleep
for about six hours,
wake up for about two
hours, and then go back
to sleep for another two hours.
And what we've lost as a result
of not having those two periods
of sleep anymore is
that in-between period--
that period between
first and second
sleep when people were
not quite fully awake, not
quite fully asleep.
I mean, something
similar to hypnogogia,
but it's described as being a
trance-like, meditative state
where people would talk
about their dreams,
maybe walk around a little bit
or converse with their mate
or something like that.
And during that period,
I think, it probably
contributed to greater
periods of lucid dreaming,
because we know from
lucid dreaming research
that when people wake
up for a period of time
in the middle of the night,
get their brain a little bit
aroused and then
go back to sleep,
there's a greater chance they're
going to have a lucid dream.
So I think that that's
one of the things that
may have gotten lost.
The other thing is--
I spoke with Dr.
Rick Strassman, who's
a researcher at the
University of Mexico.
As you know, he did amazing,
fascinating research
with dimethyltryptamine--
DMT-- which is a
neurotransmitter
found in the brain.
It's also a psychedelic.
It's also used in
the ayahuasca group.
And he says because all the
exposure to artificial light,
we're producing less
melatonin in our brain.
And he thinks as a result,
less DMT production
in our brain, which then could
affect our dreaming, as well.
>> REGINA: That makes sense.
And it's totally
doable to cure that,
but you have to
adjust the way you
want to experience your
world, because I don't
like artificial light at all.
I hate it.
And so in the daytime, I don't
have any lights on in the house
ever, just windows
open so natural light
comes in enough to do your
work, read-- read near a window.
And then at night, only 20
watt-- a couple 20 or 30 watt
bulbs, period, on in the
house mimicking candlelight.
And I do have that
pattern a lot of times.
First sleep, and then
wake up about 3:00 or 4:00
in the morning.
And then we'll chat or
whatever and then fall back
asleep for an hour or two.
And you're right-- that's
when all those really
robust, memorable
dreams come through,
which is in the second sleep.
>> BROWN: Right.
>> REGINA: But I agree with you.
If you're watching television
till 10 or 11 o'clock at night,
if you're working with
lights on in your house--
even during the day--
that's really
disturbing to the brain.
>> BROWN: Well, you're
inhibiting melatonin production
in the brain.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> BROWN: So yeah, it's throwing
everything out of balance.
>> REGINA: But we
can change that.
It's up to us.
We don't have to
have bright lights
on in the house at night.
>> BROWN: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: Or even in the day.
So I just wanted to toss that
in, because it's manageable.
We can unplug from
the industrial notion
of what lighting looks
like in our lives.
The other thing you
talked about is the notion
that men and women
dream differently.
We tend to have a predominance
of different kinds of dreams.
Can you talk about
that for a second?
>> BROWN: That men tend to dream
a little bit more aggressively,
and women tend to dream more
about experiences with other
people.
I wonder if that's not
a reflection of the fact
that men tend to be
more competitive, maybe,
and women tend to
be more cooperative,
and whether this is due to
some kind of societal influence
or whether it's due to some
kind of genetic influence,
because we see those
patterns in other animals--
other species-- as well,
where the females tend
to cooperate more and the
males tend to compete more.
So the dreams could be
reflecting something
to do with either one of
those two things, I think.
But it is fascinating.
It's very, very fascinating.
>> REGINA: And another thing
we talked about off camera
I'm finding fascinating
is that so many men--
just people that I talk to
in normal life about dreams--
I live in Sedona.
Dreams are a normal part
of conversation, right?
But so many men,
now, are finding
they're incapable of taking
a swing at another man,
that the aggression slash
violent aspect of what
used to happen doesn't
happen anymore.
They are not able to do that.
And I just mentioned
that off camera,
and I'd love to know your
thoughts on what's happening
in the morphic field there.
Because these are men that don't
necessarily know each other.
>> BROWN: Right.
Well, I would love
to think that there's
some kind of shift going
on in the universal mind
where we're shifting away from
competition and aggression
and moving more towards a more
peaceful, cooperative state
on the planet.
We certainly desperately
need it with what's
going on right now
politically and ecologically.
So I think that the male ego
is one of the things that's
out of control on this
planet right now, causing
tremendous destruction, and
the whole planet is threatened.
So wouldn't that be wonderful
if this shift in our dreams--
that men being less
aggressive-- is an indication
that it's going to mirror
in the rest of society.
That would be
absolutely-- so I'm going
to take that as an indication.
>> REGINA: Yeah, I mean, I've
just noticed it casually over
the last decade or so.
Now, granted, I live in Sedona.
People tend to--
well, I wouldn't
say it's an enlightened
society by any means.
It's people who are aspiring
to that, more than anything.
And yet, it's people
who are aspiring to it,
who are finding more
cooperative and peaceful ways
of living as a priority in
their lives-- men and women.
And so most of the
people I've talked
to that have had this experience
are at least in league
with the notion that--
what you just said.
It's desirable to reduce
the amount of tension
on the planet.
But still, this is dream time.
And they literally are incapable
of taking a swing at someone
when they're under fire.
Isn't that fascinating?
>> BROWN: That is fascinating.
I really hope that's
indicative that we're--
>> REGINA: I think it is.
>> BROWN: I hope that we're
at the forefront of where
the whole human species is in
the direction of moving right
now.
>> REGINA: It actually
gives me great hope.
That's the same way
I feel about it.
There's something
happening there.
So anyway, that's a
lovely little takeaway.
Also feline deities.
Let's talk about your
dreams a bit, OK?
OK, take it away.
>> BROWN: OK, well, when I was
in Israel around 15 years ago,
I had a fascinating dream--
disturbing, deeply
powerful dream--
where I was in some
sort of large temple.
With a large group of people and
up in the stage of the temple
was an altar of some
type, or a throne.
And sitting on the altar was
what I recognized as a goddess.
And everybody there was there
to worship this goddess.
And the goddess had
the head of a wildcat.
It was a cat head, a feline
head, and other animal parts
to it.
It was a hybrid
sort of creature.
And it was sitting
up on the throne,
and there was this tremendous
feeling of anxiety and fear
that was rippling out
through the congregation.
And everyone knew that it
was just a matter of time
before one of us was going
to be sacrificed to this God.
And out of the
eyes of this deity
shot a laser beam that
struck one of the people
in the audience.
They immediately fell
down dead, and there
was a feeling of relief
throughout the whole room.
>> REGINA: Because
the person had--
it had happened already and
you were no longer in danger.
>> BROWN: No one was in--
yeah, that was the sacrifice
to the God, or something.
And interestingly, the God--
the deity, then,
turned to stone.
Her eyes became empty, and she
suddenly looked very stone-like
and didn't look like she was
a living entity any longer.
>> REGINA: What
was your take away?
>> BROWN: I woke up from the
dream sweating, and I was very,
very anxious.
And it didn't feel
like a personal dream.
It felt like I was
tapping into something
like what Carl Jung would call
the collective unconscious.
It was some kind of
universal, big dream
that I was tapping into.
But the most remarkable thing,
Regina, was a couple of years
later, I was looking through
a book on Egyptian mythology.
And there I saw an image--
a photograph-- of Bastet--
the Egyptian deity
that was a replica
of what I experienced
in the dream.
And how she got into my dream
when I was in Israel, I--
morphic field or
something like that.
I don't know what
other explanation there
is, because I had no
knowledge of that at the time.
>> REGINA: Well, and in general,
when you were studying ancient
perspectives on dreaming--
Greek and Egyptian, both--
they believe that
they were interfacing
with other beings and
higher intelligence forces
during dream time.
So let's talk about
that a little bit,
and maybe even some of your
own observations or experiences
with what you felt was maybe
a more refined consciousness
reaching into you.
>> BROWN: Well,
one of the things--
>> REGINA: Not the scary
ones, the good ones.
>> BROWN: Well, one
of the things that--
one of my favorite things
to do in lucid dreaming
is to interact with
the dream characters--
with the characters
themselves-- to actually start
talking to them.
And when you start talking
to them, I mean, some of them
seem a little bit robotic
and not very bright.
Others seem as
independently-minded as you
and I seem, and it's very,
very compellingly real
and it's very hard to
think that they're not
an actual, living intelligence.
And then you encounter
these other beings
that seem to know a
whole lot more about you
than you know yourself.
And I recall there
was the spiritual,
or the wise, masters.
And you can encounter
this whole range
of beings inside of a
lucid dream or inside
of a shamanic experience.
It's very similar.
And what I found
even more powerful
than talking to the
dream characters
is to talk to the dream itself.
To just simply ignore
the environment,
to ignore the
characters, and to simply
lift your head to the sky
and just ask a question
to the dream.
And surprisingly,
something responds.
The dream responds.
And it will respond either by
speaking to you in English,
or by changing the
scenery of the dream
around in some kind of way.
But it does respond.
Sometimes it doesn't
respond in that dream.
Sometimes it'll respond
several dreams later.
But it does respond to you.
And who is it that's responding?
That's the big question.
Is your unconscious mind?
Is it one of these
daemons or one
of these other intelligences
that the Greeks believed
that we were communicating
with, one of these spirits?
I try, in my book,
not to adhere myself
to any one particular
belief system,
but try to show the
different belief systems.
>> REGINA: Just
the possibilities.
>> BROWN: Could be any
number one of those things.
But whatever it is,
there is the ability
to communicate with these
beings or with this higher self,
and it is very, very compelling.
And they will teach you
things about yourself
that you don't already know.
>> REGINA: Absolutely
If I get messages,
there's a particular voice.
And if I hear that voice
telling me something in a dream,
then I better pay attention,
because it's always
a heads up that I really
needed at the time.
And so that, to me,
is very sacred--
those relationships that
we have in dream time.
Especially when you have, again,
I think a trusted relationship
that-- it's tried and true.
Where you've seen the validity,
you've seen it bear out.
You can develop a
lot of confidence
once you realize that--
ah, last time that happened,
this exactly happened.
It did go that way.
I'm glad I listened,
and so forth.
So those are relationships to
develop trust between, just
like on Earth, right?
>> BROWN: Exactly.
>> REGINA: What about the
notion-- oh, I'm sorry.
Did you have something
more on that?
>> BROWN: I was
just going to say--
that sort of trust that
builds up, I think,
is very important, because
people actually ask me about,
when you encounter
one of these entities,
how should you relate to them?
And I always say,
just like you would
relate to any other person
that you actually meet,
any other stranger.
I mean, don't
immediately trust them.
Be skeptical of what they say.
Don't assume that
everything they say
is going to be
God-given advice to you.
But be very open to it and
take it in and with time,
when you see they're
right and they make sense,
then you can build
up a sense of trust.
And that happens over
time with these entities.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
And we've got to look at
the other entities, as well.
I mean, in dream time, as
with using other substances
and hallucinogens, it
is every bit as likely
a person will start
interfacing with lower realms.
And lower realms
can be tricksters.
Lot of tricky stuff
going on there.
>> BROWN: Right.
>> REGINA: Let's talk about that
interface with darker realms,
as well.
>> BROWN: Well, that's why I
tell people to be skeptical
and to not always believe
everything you hear when
you're encountering
these beings.
I mean, who knows, really,
what their origin is
or what their intentions are
or whether they have your best
intentions at heart?
So I think it's very
important to always maintain
a certain degree of
skepticism with these beings.
>> REGINA: And the
discernment process, then,
becomes critical.
Even when you're
sleeping, discernment--
if you're programming
your mind to become aware
and become discerning
even during dream time.
Which then, of course, leads to
a certain amount of lucidity.
But my observation
is really simple.
If you have any
kind of being that's
perpetuating fearful
circumstance of any kind
or controlling or
demanding something of you
or hierarchical, then I
will, without question,
assume that this is
a lower realm that's
trying to intrude upon
someone's consciousness.
Period.
>> BROWN: I think
that's a good gauge.
>> REGINA: Really simple.
If it's not
empowering, if it's not
lifting you up, encouraging,
giving permission,
you're dealing
with lower realms.
>> BROWN: I think, in
general, that's true.
There is something to
be said for the fact
that some of these people have
to confront traumas in order
to grow during the process.
>> REGINA: And they
can show up that way,
to make you aware enough to know
that there is that issue there
that must still be transformed.
And I think in that case,
that's where lower realms really
serve their function well.
And we tend to put everything
that's of a little bit darker,
scarier, lower in--
and again, that's
hierarchical even saying that.
But darker, so to speak,
or more uncomfortable.
We tend to demonize that.
And they're called daemons,
as a matter of fact.
But the reality is they're
showing up for a reason.
There's something
unhealed, something
that needs transforming, or
they wouldn't be showing up
on that dreamscape.
>> BROWN: Yeah, I think
everything that shows up
in our dreams is there
because it needs healing.
It needs to be recognized
at this particular time.
So I think that it's very
important to recognize and take
account for everything
you experience right now.
>> REGINA: And so talk about
feelings in dream time,
because the notion that a dream
can have all these symbols,
symbols are different
for everybody.
What a squirrel is to
one person in a dream
it's not to the other person.
>> BROWN: Right.
It's different for every
person, but every person
should be able to recognize
what it means to them.
>> REGINA: That's
what I'm saying.
That's where feelings really
come in in dream time.
How did that experience
make you feel?
You say the feline character,
you woke up sweating.
It was a very disturbing dream
about these controlling forces
that were, again, these
lower realms demanding
blood sacrifice--
really low stuff.
But it was very clear,
and that sense of relief--
and there's a lesson
in that, right?
Well, at least it wasn't me.
Everything's OK in
the world, right?
In that one.
Everyone breathed
a sigh of relief.
>> BROWN: I mean, I took
that dream, by the way,
as evidence for the origin
of religion, basically.
That religion, that there were
a lot of animal sacrifices
at the beginning of
religions, and why was that?
And it led me to
a lot of insight.
I spoke to Rupert
Sheldrake, actually.
I described in my
book, actually--
>> REGINA: What did
he say about that?
>> BROWN: He said that he
thought that the dream that I
had in Israel was representative
of what he had read in Barbara
Ehrenreich's book
called "Blood Rites"
about how in early
human societies,
we were often the
prey of animals--
of wildcats.
And we recognized
that because one of us
had to be sacrificed for
the wildcat to be satiated--
that once it was satiated,
it would then leave us alone.
And it would also
kill other prey.
It would kill other animals
that we would then harvest from.
We would then eat.
So it was providing for us and
also taking one of our own.
And Barbara Ehrenreich
and Rupert Sheldrake
told me that they
thought that this
may have had an influence on
the development of religion.
And Rupert saw that dream as
being some type of evidence
for that type of idea.
>> REGINA: Interesting.
So I also have come to--
I don't think it's fair
to say a belief, but maybe
my current
understanding, because it
morphs as I have new evidence.
If you're open-minded,
everything's morphing, right?
>> BROWN: Yeah, you're
entertaining ideas.
>> REGINA: Entertaining ideas.
I'm entertaining
this idea that when
we look back at some of the work
that we feature here at Gaia--
the work of Zecharia Sitchin
and Erich von Daniken
and others that have
basically run off
with the Anunnaki story.
Which is a pixel of history.
I mean, there are a lot of other
influences far prior to that,
but even so.
When again you start looking at
the intrusion, or corruption,
of the message upon humanity--
that there are these
demanding, wrathful gods--
which has been perpetuated
in Sunday school to this day,
right?
In all of the
Abrahamic traditions.
When you have that
overlay that's
now been perpetuated in our
soul group and tribal families
as stories, it's in our DNA.
I mean, it's in
our spiritual DNA.
That has to be having a
tremendously negative impact
on humanity in their
dream time, as well.
Like you say-- sacrifices,
these fearful entities.
These entities that
are to be feared.
>> BROWN: Right, right--
these religious institutions.
>> REGINA: That's why I bring
it up, is because you said that.
I think that the
religious institutions
are hugely responsible for
the amount of anxiety and fear
in dreams.
If you just start
off with the fact
that you have to please
some wrathful God,
your psyche is damaged
from day one, right?
>> BROWN: Right, right.
Well, I think that they're
responsible for a lot
of the anxiety in
waking life, as well.
>> REGINA: Absolutely--
and waking life, as well.
Yeah, we're on that.
OK, let's talk about
images that people
see with their eyes closed.
Let's talk about, now,
moving over into peyote--
the whole spectrum
of hallucinogens.
And each one has their
own characteristics.
>> BROWN: Right, well, when
people do a psychedelic,
when people do ayahuasca,
peyote, magic mushrooms,
psilocybin, one of the
most interesting aspects
of the experience is that
with your eyes closed,
you tend to see visions.
You tend to see imagery.
You tend to see shifting forms.
You tend to see patterns that
develop into beings or animals
or scenes or environments.
And what's most interesting
is that if you really
pay attention to
this imagery, you
notice that it's not
completely random, that there's
some kind of message.
It's like if you
put them together,
it's almost like the
different images are
like different letters
in an alphabet.
And they're forming
sentences, and it's
trying to communicate
with you something.
And in my own
experience with this,
it really seems like there's
some type of higher mind that
is using this imagery.
And the imagery seems very
similar to dream imagery.
It seems one image can have
four or five different meanings.
Many meanings are encoded into
a particular image or scene.
And when you sit there
watching these things--
particularly on
ayahuasca or mushrooms--
it's extremely common
where people will sit there
with their eyes closed.
First of all, a gap at how
just amazing these things look.
They're incredible.
Their visions truly
are-- the colors.
I mean, they're really amazing.
But deeper than the bewilderment
from the amazement of that
is the deep meaning that's
bestowed upon people.
And if you can really
sit there and really
watch and really
pay attention, you
can often learn a
lot about yourself.
>> REGINA: And would you say
it's best if you have a guide
of some kind and you're
taught how to do this,
or just jump in?
>> BROWN: Oh, it's always
best to have a guide.
It's definitely
something that could
be potentially psychologically
dangerous if someone is not
properly prepared.
In indigenous society, it's
always been done with a shaman.
For thousands of years,
they've always used shamans.
And right now, of course, what's
going on with psychedelics
is they're using it
in psychotherapy.
So it's being used
with a therapist, which
basically takes the modern
day equivalent of a shaman.
So these things-- especially
if they're being used
for healing--
are almost always
far more effective
if they're used in conjunction
with some other healing
modality.
They work very well,
synergistically, on their own.
They're not quite
nearly as powerful,
and they can be a
lot more dangerous.
But together, they
really can be powerful.
And together, they're
usually pretty safe.
And people have really had
some really amazing healing
experiences with ayahuasca.
>> REGINA: Yeah, we hear about
all the people that have done
LSD forever.
And again, just under
their own steam.
And that's a whole
different thing.
I mean, you do have to be
somewhat careful about your use
of hallucinogens.
I mean, I'm one of those people
that tries everything once.
Not everything, but
a lot of things once,
just to see what it's like.
And wow-- just randomly.
No education first.
No guidance.
Just like, hm, I wonder
what that would feel like?
And so I've had the
experiences that way.
And it's been interesting.
I mean, going to the
Louvre on LSD was fine.
I mean, I got stuck
looking at those--
can't remember the
artist's name--
those fruit and vegetable
heads from the 1500s.
>> BROWN: I know
who you're talking--
I can't remember the artist,
but I know who you mean, yeah.
>> REGINA: I stayed there
almost the whole time,
and then ended up out on
a ledge on the third floor
of the cafeteria--
sitting on a ledge having
a snack with pigeons.
So it had its ups and downs.
>> BROWN: So you and I, both.
I walked around Paris--
when I was in college I did.
I went to the Pompidou Center
while tripping on acid.
It was so fun.
>> REGINA: It really was fun.
They just asked us to
get back off of the ledge
and get back in the window.
I don't even know how we
managed to get out there.
I mean, everyone has
their unique experience.
And it also depends
a lot, though,
on the psychology
that's underneath it
and your own base,
psychologically,
at the time-- whether it's
stable, unstable, more aware
or more depressed, for example.
So what do you have to say
along that line about what
you would encourage people
to do if they're really
looking for themselves
and having a hard time--
depressed, say, even?
>> BROWN: With
psychedelics, you mean, or?
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> BROWN: The most important
thing to remember about any
psychedelic experience--
well, first of all,
is reading as much
about it as you can.
Educate yourself is the
most important thing.
The next thing I would say
that's really most important
is understanding
set and setting.
Your set is the mental
state that you're
in-- whether you're
depressed, happy.
You obviously want
to be in a state
where you're feeling
very emotionally stable.
The setting is the
place where you actually
do it-- your environment.
You want to be in a place
where you feel very safe, very
comfortable, where there's no
interruptions, where you're
with people that you don't
feel any kind of animosity
with, where you feel
close bonding with.
Because I mean, doing this with
someone is extremely intimate.
It's like becoming
naked with someone.
You become like a
little baby again.
So it's a very, very,
very powerful experience
that can go off in all
different directions.
So it's very important
to be with someone
who knows what
they're doing, really,
and to work with
somebody who's actually
had the experience before you--
to talk to other people who
have had the experience.
And preferably to
be with someone
who's had the experience
when you do it.
The word they don't really
use anymore is guide.
They've stopped using that.
The maps stopped using that.
The word they use
now is "sitter,"
because you don't want to--
>> REGINA: Sitter.
Sitter is like a
babysitter, right.
>> BROWN: Because you don't
want to influence, so much,
their experiences, just be there
with them to be there if they
need you.
>> REGINA: Now, some of the
experiences people have during
sleep and will try to relate
these back and forth during
sleep-- and also,
I think, at times,
when they're using
various hallucinogens--
is a state of paralysis.
Can you talk about
that a little bit?
>> BROWN: Yeah, well,
sleep paralysis.
Sleep paralysis is a state
when people sometimes
experience when they
wake up in the morning
and they're not
fully woken up yet
and they can't move their body.
And it's often a terrifying
experience for people.
They're unable to
move, and they often
struggle, struggle, struggle
really, really, really hard.
And in that interim,
trying to move,
they're still in
somewhat REM sleep.
So they're actually
seeing some dream imagery,
and it's very common for
them to experience, say,
a menacing figure to be coming
towards them or something.
And people get very frightened
and often just startle
and jump awake very quickly.
That state of sleep
paralysis, I've learned,
is actually a launching
pad for lucid dreaming
if you learn to not--
>> REGINA: Freak out.
>> BROWN: Yeah, if you learn
to not freak out and get too
scared and just stay there with
it and focus your attention
from your physical body to--
if you try to move your body,
you realize your body doesn't
move, but something does.
There's like an astral
limb, or a dream limb,
or something that moves.
And if you start trying to focus
your attention on that instead
of your physical
body, you'll slowly
start to identify more with the
dream body or the astral body.
And you can then use
that as a launching
pad to go off into an
out-of-body experience
or lucid dream.
So that's one of the
techniques that I've actually
learned from sleep paralysis.
The reason that people
go into sleep paralysis
is because when
people are sleeping,
it's probably not
advantageous for their bodies
to be moving around and
acting out the dreams--
the actions of the dream.
>> REGINA: Well, especially
if you're what's called astral
traveling.
You want the body to be
quiet and safe, right?
And there's a fine
line between dreaming
and what we call astral travel.
It can look very similar.
>> BROWN: Well, the big
difference between dreaming
and astral traveling is that
we can very clearly define
dreaming.
Astral traveling's
hard to define,
and I've heard different
definitions of it.
So it's a little
bit harder for me
to pin down exactly what's
happening when someone's astral
traveling.
But certainly, out-of-body
experiences and lucid dream
experiences-- there's a lot
of crossover between the two
types of phenomena.
>> REGINA: Another somewhat--
if not common, at least
well-known phenomena
having to do with
sleep paralysis--
often has to do with
people's experience
of interfacing with ET realms.
Can you talk about
that a little bit?
>> BROWN: You know, I
haven't heard that so much.
But I'll tell you what
that brings to mind.
That brings to mind Rick
Strassman's work with DMT--
the DMT spaces that
people accessed
during those
experiences, which are
somewhat similar to
lucid dream experiences.
Many people report being
in the laboratories
of extraterrestrial creatures
doing experiments on them,
communicating with
extraterrestrial or
interdimensional-type beings.
It's a very, very
common experience.
So what the relationship
is is very mysterious,
or interesting.
But a lot of people
have speculated
that in that state
of sleep paralysis,
people's DMT levels
are naturally going up.
So it could be that
elevation in DMT
that is somehow
giving people access
to these other
hyper-dimensional realms.
And I think it's highly possible
that these realms are inhabited
by beings that are more advanced
than us, that are more evolved
than us, and that are probably
eager to communicate with us
once we get there.
>> REGINA: It seems, though,
that in that particular
scenario where people have the
sleep paralysis that related
to ET experience, that
oftentimes-- for most of them--
it's frightening.
It's a frightening experience.
And John Mack--
Dr. John Mack, the late Dr.
John Mack, of course, did--
yeah.
>> BROWN: OK, now I know
what you referring to, yeah.
>> REGINA: Thousands of case
histories on this that happened
during that.
And it's really
hard to determine,
when you listen to a person's
story, what's going on.
But it appears it's
interdimensional,
because your body's not
actually in two places at once.
But they can come back and
have the hallmarks of--
they have physical symptoms.
They'll have physical
implants, or some people
I know have this interesting
little thing that
happens on their backs or
the back of their shoulder,
which is like a triangle
of pricks in a triangle.
And so you think, well, is this
another dimensional experience,
a dream experience?
Or is this a physical reality?
And this, to me, is an
interesting mystery.
>> BROWN: Oh, it's such
a fascinating mystery.
In fact, I spoke to
John Mack about that.
I interviewed him
for one of my books.
And I asked him
specifically what
he thought the difference
was between people
who have contact experiences--
through a psychedelic
experience or through
an abduction experience,
as it's often called.
And he said exactly
what you said--
oftentimes, they report
very similar experiences.
But with the
abduction experience,
it's often physical evidence
that often corresponds with it.
Not only the marks on the body
like you described, but often
radar readings, sometimes, or
sightings of UFOs and things
like that, that correspond
with the timing of the person's
abduction experience.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
I'm still trying to understand.
Because we know that this
etheric template surrounding
the human body is
the precursor to what
happens in the
physical body and what
manifests in the physical body.
And thoughts, emotions,
everything impact
EMF fields-- everything
impacts this etheric field
around the body, right?
And so that will
end up manifesting
on the physical level.
Is it possible that trauma that
happens on these other slightly
phased-off levels
of consciousness
can appear physically
in the physical body?
Because it seems like that
might be the implication
there, unless someone
came into the room
and started poking them
while they were sleeping.
>> BROWN: I think that's
certainly a very highly
plausible theory.
I mean, it's hard to
say which comes first.
Could the physical body
influence the etheric body?
I mean-- it's like
the mind-body problem,
because we don't really know
whether the mind affects
the body more than the
body affects the mind.
They certainly
affect each other.
So there's an interesting
communication between the two.
And I think it could apply
to the etheric and physical
bodies, as well.
>> REGINA: Yes.
Let's talk about that--
flip the lens a little bit
and talk about
healing that happens
through lucid dreaming and some
of the research you've read,
but also some of
your own experiences.
>> BROWN: Yeah.
Isn't that fascinating?
I think that's probably one
of the most practical areas
that lucid dreaming-- it's
one of the things that's
been used in shamanism
as a mode for healing.
I wish I could say
that there's been
a whole lot of scientific
research in this area.
Unfortunately, there
really hasn't been.
>> REGINA: Not much.
>> BROWN: There
really hasn't been.
There's been a few
little studies-- mostly
case studies-- of
people, but there's
been quite a few anecdotes.
When I spoke to Robert Waggoner,
the author of the book "Lucid
Dreaming"-- he edits
a quarterly magazine
called "Lucid Dreaming."
He says that every
issue he's flooded
with a certain number
of dreams where
people experience healing.
In researching my own book, one
of the stories that I recounted
was from someone who described
having a very serious infection
in their tonsils.
Very, very serious from
having accidentally
poked it with a skewer
when they were eating.
And when they went to
sleep-- and in the dream,
they became lucid and said,
I'm going to try to heal this.
So they went over to a mirror.
They stood in
front of the mirror
and they imagined a
glowing light just coming
from around their neck-- just
imagined this glowing light.
And they felt like there
was some kind of shift that
was going on during the
dream, and just imagine that.
And when they woke
up, remarkably, they
reported that 95%
of the infection
had healed during that time.
So it's really quite remarkable.
This is really something
that really should
be researched a whole lot more.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
Have you played
with it yourself?
>> BROWN: I really haven't
played with it myself.
But I have spoken to people who
not only talked about healing,
but talked about healing
other people in their dreams.
They were able to
heal other people.
And the other people
then spoke to them
and confirmed that they were
able to confirm these things.
>> REGINA: Yeah, I find
that part fascinating.
And I agree with you--
more research is needed.
But we don't need research, per
se, to start playing with it
if we have something.
I mean, you can also listen and
whether it's your higher self
or other intelligences that
work with you-- guides,
whatnot come through--
they'll also
communicate with you
about what's brewing, what's
taking place in the body
and what's about to
manifest so you can
deal with it a little earlier.
But, yeah.
>> BROWN: Yeah, I wanted to
say that I didn't use dreaming,
ever, to heal from a
physical injury or an illness
or something like that.
But I did use it to help heal
from a trauma from childhood.
It was instrumental in
helping me heal from childhood
post-traumatic stress disorder.
So I know from
personal experience
that it has great
potential for healing.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
Now, you write in
the book that you
need to be aware, even
in lucid dreaming,
because it can be
a little dangerous.
And you asked the question, can
lucid dreaming be dangerous?
And what was your answer?
>> BROWN: Well,
it's interesting,
because somebody had asked
me that question first,
and I thought it was
a silly question.
I was like, what could happen?
You're going to
fall off your bed?
I mean, I was trying to
think of what could actually
happen that could be dangerous.
And people are, if anything,
trying to stay in lucid dreams
as long as possible.
However, there was a few
things in my research
that came up that gave me
a little pause as to how it
can be a little bit dangerous.
Maybe somebody who is not
fully mentally stable--
someone who suffers
from, say, schizophrenia,
who already has trouble
distinguishing between what's
real and what's not--
maybe those people shouldn't
be using techniques
to try to expand the sense of--
>> REGINA: Because they're
already too open to other
influences of, usually, a lower
realm or darker realm nature.
>> BROWN: Yeah, and in my book,
I describe a couple of tragic
cases, actually.
So there is reason to
think that, in some cases,
it could be dangerous.
However, in general, it's been
proven-- mostly-- to be safe.
Almost everybody has
positive experiences--
therapeutic,
healing experiences.
Some people have to deal with
nightmares in the experience,
which can be frightening.
It's rare, but it does happen.
People have nightmares.
And then they sometimes need to
try to wake up from a nightmare
or try to figure out a way--
Stephen LaBerge
actually recommends
that if you encounter
a threatening figure
or a menacing figure in a
dream, that really the best
thing to do is to try
to approach the figure--
not to run, to try to
approach the figure.
Try to talk to it.
Ask it, say, what
do you represent?
What are you here?
Try to hug the
creature if you can.
>> REGINA: Yes, that's
very good advice.
>> BROWN: Yeah, and then you
can actually help to integrate
and process those repressed or
damaged emotions and traumas
and things like that.
>> REGINA: And sometimes
you're actually helping to heal
another entity.
>> BROWN: Exactly, right, yeah.
So you're helping
each other, then.
What a beautiful
experience that could be.
>> REGINA: Indeed-- if you're
cognizant enough not to just
start running.
Which most people do, of course.
You know, another area--
we only have a few minutes left,
but I find it fascinating--
is the notion of how
magnetic fields work with us.
We know how they work
with us in daytime.
I mean, a lot of
people do, anyway--
our waking mind.
And we're having a lot
of issues at large.
People are having
short-term memory loss.
As the magnetic field of the
Earth continues dissipating,
we're seeing more
unstable behaviors.
I mean, that's just a fact.
And we can't blame
it all on psyops.
I mean, there is also
the damaging effect.
Not damaging-- the lack of
support of the magnetic field
that once was.
And you talk about the
relationship between dreams
and the magnetic fields of
Earth in the book, as well.
>> BROWN: I talk about
the volcanic activity.
Is that what you're
referring to?
The volcanic activity in
the Hawaiian Islands--
I was speaking to
a researcher who
talked about how there's a
relationship between reports
of sleep paralysis
and volcanic activity
in the Hawaiian Islands.
Now, what that means is really--
who knows?
But in part of my research
with Rupert Sheldrake,
I also learned that
there's a relationship
between the crystals in the
earth and the Piezoelectric
effect and animal behavior.
>> REGINA: That's all
electromagnetic, yeah.
>> BROWN: Gives off
electric fields.
These electric fields
can influence an animal's
nervous system, influence
their neurotransmitter levels,
and influence their behavior
in interesting ways.
So we know that
geologic activity
can influence nervous
systems, influence behavior.
And what's going on in
the volcanic islands
is fascinating.
People are experiencing
more sleep paralysis
during these periods.
So if you want to
time it, you can
try to have--
sleep paralysis can
be a launching pad
for lucid dreaming,
like I mentioned earlier.
So try to get to the
Hawaiian Islands.
Hang out where
there's volcanoes.
But there might be safer ways to
have lucid dreams than hanging
out on top of a volcano.
>> REGINA: I would agree.
And then I think a lot
of people, the biggest
frustration-- and this
will be my final question--
is that you have
a fabulous dream
and then you don't remember it.
So what are some
general practices
you find useful to help
people just simply remember
all their dreams, just
remember your dreams?
>> BROWN: Yeah, well, the most
important thing if you really
want to remember dreams--
which is actually essential
for becoming lucid in dreams,
is remembering your dreams
better--
is to start paying
attention to them.
That's really just the
most important thing.
Start writing them down.
If you have a
snippet of a dream,
write it down in the
middle of the night.
Always keep a pad
next to your bed.
Always keep-- or a audio
recorder, something
where you can always
write it down.
Even if you just have a feeling,
write down that feeling.
I feel a little bit nauseous.
I feel anxious.
I feel happy-- whatever
the feeling is.
>> REGINA: Keep your
old dream journal there.
>> BROWN: Yeah, and you find
that the more attention--
the more you start
writing down--
more starts coming back to you.
It starts snowballing.
You start doing that
for a couple days,
and you'll actually
start to remember more.
So keeping a dream
journal, paying attention,
writing down whatever it
is that you remember--
even if it's just a feeling--
and then sometimes
just lying in the dark
without turning the
light on is a good way
to help bring back dreams before
they dissolve into the ether.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
Another little
trick I found, too,
was tell your subconscious mind
that when the crux of the dream
comes through-- the really
important part, the message--
to be sure to gently
but surely wake me up.
Wake me up when the major
message comes through
so I don't miss it.
Because otherwise, you're just
going from dream to dream.
And I found that works
pretty well, too.
>> BROWN: Yeah, you can instruct
your unconscious just to follow
through, and it
will follow through.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
Any final thoughts
before we say goodbye?
>> BROWN: Oh, hope everybody--
I just want to say that just by
talking about lucid dreaming,
just by thinking about lucid
dreaming, just by interacting
and having it in your
mind, I'll bet you
a good portion of
your audience is going
to have a lucid dream tonight.
>> REGINA: I would
not be surprised.
And thank you so much
for all your research
and for your lovely
work on the book.
>> BROWN: Thank
you so very much.
It's been a real
pleasure, Regina.
>> REGINA: The name of the
book is, "Dreaming Wide Awake,"
and you can find it
at major booksellers.
Meanwhile, you might
also enjoy my interviews
with Robert Moss in
the CMN archives.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]